1.	Select Your Operating System (OS): Choose an operating system that best suits your preferences and project requirements. Download and Install Windows 11. https://www.microsoft.com/software-download/windows11
System Requirements
Ensure your PC meets the minimum system requirements for Windows 11:
Processor: 1 gigahertz (GHz) or faster with at least 2 cores on a compatible 64-bit processor or System on a Chip (SoC)
RAM: 4 GB or more
Storage: 64 GB or larger storage device
System firmware: UEFI, Secure Boot capable
TPM: Trusted Platform Module (TPM) version 2.0
Graphics card: DirectX 12 compatible graphics / WDDM 2.x
Display: >9” with HD Resolution (720p)
Internet connection: Internet connectivity is necessary to perform updates and to download and take advantage of some features.
Step-by-Step Guide
1. Backup Your Data
Before proceeding with the installation, back up all important data to avoid any potential data loss.
2. Check Compatibility
Use the PC Health Check tool from Microsoft to check if your PC is compatible with Windows 11:
Download and install the PC Health Check tool.
3. Download Windows 11 Installation Media
Go to the Windows 11 download page.
You have three options:

Windows 11 Installation Assistant: This is the easiest way to upgrade your PC to Windows 11.
Download the Installation Assistant and run it.
Follow the on-screen instructions to upgrade your PC.
Create Windows 11 Installation Media: This is useful if you want to perform a clean install or install Windows 11 on another PC.
Download the Media Creation Tool.
Run the tool and follow the instructions to create a bootable USB drive or DVD.
Download Windows 11 Disk Image (ISO): This is useful if you want to create your own installation media.
Select "Download now" and follow the instructions to download the ISO file.
Use a tool like Rufus to create a bootable USB drive from the ISO file.
4. Install Windows 11
If you are using the Windows 11 Installation Assistant:
Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
If you are using bootable installation media:
Insert the bootable USB drive or DVD into your PC.
Restart your PC and boot from the USB drive or DVD (you might need to change the boot order in your BIOS/UEFI settings).
Follow the on-screen instructions to install Windows 11. Choose "Custom" if you want to perform a clean install.
5. Activation
After installation, Windows 11 should automatically activate if you are upgrading from a genuine copy of Windows 10. If not, you may need to enter your Windows 11 product key.

6. Update Drivers and Software
After the installation is complete, update your drivers and software to ensure everything works smoothly.
Troubleshooting
If you encounter any issues, refer to the Windows 11 support page.
2.	Install a Text Editor or Integrated Development Environment (IDE): Select and install a text editor or IDE suitable for your programming languages and workflow. Download and Install Visual Studio Code. https://code.visualstudio.com/Download
Visit the Visual Studio website:
Go to the Visual Studio download page.
Choose your edition:
Select the edition you want to install:
Community (Free for individual developers, open-source projects, academic research, education, and small professional teams)
Professional (Paid, with a free trial)
Enterprise (Paid, with a free trial)
Download the installer:
Click the "Free download" button for the edition you chose. Run the downloaded installer.
Select workloads:
When the Visual Studio Installer launches, you will be prompted to select the workloads you need (e.g., ASP.NET and web development, Desktop development with C++, etc.). Check the boxes for the workloads you want and click "Install."
Install and launch:
The installer will download and install the necessary components. This process might take some time. Once the installation is complete, launch Visual Studio and sign in with your Microsoft account if prompted
3.	Set Up Version Control System: Install Git and configure it on your local machine. Create a GitHub account for hosting your repositories. Initialize a Git repository for your project and make your first commit. https://github.com
1. Install Git
Visit the Git website and download the Git installer for your operating system.
Run the installer and follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
2. Configure Git
Open a terminal or command prompt.
Configure your Git username and email by running the following commands:
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global user.email "your.email@example.com"
3. Create a GitHub Account
Go to GitHub and sign up for a new account if you don't already have one.
4. Initialize a Git Repository
Navigate to your project directory in the terminal or command prompt.
Initialize a new Git repository by running:
git init
5. Make Your First Commit
Add your project files to the repository:
git add .
Commit the files with a descriptive message:
git commit -m "Initial commit"
6. Push to GitHub
Create a new repository on GitHub.
Follow the instructions provided by GitHub to link your local repository to the GitHub repository. 
git remote add origin https://github.com/your-username/your-repository.git
git branch -M main
git push -u origin main
4.	Install Necessary Programming Languages and Runtimes: Instal Python from http://wwww.python.org programming language required for your project and install their respective compilers, interpreters, or runtimes. Ensure you have the necessary tools to build and execute your code.
To install the necessary programming languages and runtimes, first, download and install Python from python.org, ensuring to check "Add Python to PATH" during installation. Verify the installation by running python --version or python3 --version in a terminal. For other languages, follow a similar process: download the installer from the official website, run it, and verify the installation. For example, for Node.js, visit nodejs.org, download and run the installer, then verify with node --version and npm --version. For Java, visit the Java download page, install the JDK, and verify with java --version. Additionally, install necessary tools and libraries using package managers like pip for Python (pip install package_name) or npm for Node.js (npm install package_name). Verify all installations by running test commands or small scripts.
5.	Install Package Managers: If applicable, install package managers like pip (Python).
To install package managers, first ensure you have the appropriate programming language installed. For Python, pip is usually included by default. If it's not, you can install it manually by opening a terminal or command prompt and running python -m ensurepip --upgrade. For Node.js, npm is included with the Node.js installation. If you need a package manager for another language or environment, follow the specific instructions for that package manager. For example, for Ruby, you would use gem, and for JavaScript in a Node.js environment, you can use npm or yarn. Ensure these package managers are installed and configured properly to manage your project dependencies.
6.	Configure a Database (MySQL): Download and install MySQL database. https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/windows/installer/5.7.html
Download MySQL Installer:
Visit the MySQL download page and download the MySQL Installer for Windows.
Run the Installer:
Locate the downloaded installer file and double-click to run it.
If prompted by User Account Control (UAC), click "Yes" to allow the installer to make changes to your device.
Choose Installation Type:
Select the installation type (e.g., Developer Default, Server Only) that suits your needs. The Developer Default option typically includes MySQL Server, MySQL Workbench, and other tools useful for development.
Configure MySQL Server:
Follow the installer prompts to configure MySQL Server. You may need to choose installation directories and set up administrative credentials (root password).
Complete the Installation:
Once the installation completes, MySQL Server will be installed and running on your machine.
Optionally, install MySQL Workbench or other tools included in the installer to manage your MySQL databases.
Verify Installation:
Open MySQL Workbench or a command prompt.
Connect to the MySQL server using the root username and the password you set during installation.
Manage Your Database:
Use MySQL Workbench or command-line tools (mysql client) to create databases, tables, and manage users as needed for your project
7.	Set Up Development Environments and Virtualization (Optional): Consider using virtualization tools like Docker or virtual machines to isolate project dependencies and ensure consistent environments across different machines.
Choose Virtualization Tool:
Decide whether you want to use Docker, virtual machines (e.g., VMware, VirtualBox), or another virtualization solution based on your project's requirements and your familiarity with the tools.
Install Virtualization Software:
Docker:
Visit the Docker website and download Docker Desktop for your operating system.
Run the installer and follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
Virtual Machines (e.g., VirtualBox, VMware):
Visit the respective websites (e.g., VirtualBox or VMware) and download the installer for your operating system.
Run the installer and follow the prompts to install the virtualization software.
Configure Docker (if using):
Start Docker Desktop after installation.
Adjust Docker settings as needed, such as resource allocation (CPU, memory) and network configuration.
Set Up Virtual Machines (if using):
Create a new virtual machine using the virtualization software's interface.
Configure the virtual machine settings including CPU cores, RAM, disk size, and networking.
Create Development Environment
Docker:
Create a Dockerfile for your project to define its dependencies and environment setup.
Build a Docker image from the Dockerfile and run containers based on this image for development.
Virtual Machines:
Install your preferred operating system inside the virtual machine.
Install necessary programming languages, tools, and dependencies within the virtual machine environment.
Manage Project Dependencies:
Use Docker containers or virtual machine snapshots to manage and isolate project dependencies, ensuring consistency across different development environments and machines.
Integrate with Version Control:
Ensure your Dockerfiles or virtual machine configurations are version-controlled alongside your project code to maintain reproducibility and ease collaboration.
Optimize Performance (Optional):
Adjust virtual machine or Docker container settings for optimal performance based on your hardware resources and project requirements.
8.	Explore Extensions and Plugins: Explore available extensions, plugins, and add-ons for your chosen text editor or IDE to enhance functionality, such as syntax highlighting, linting, code formatting, and version control integration.
Choose Your Text Editor or IDE:
Select the text editor or integrated development environment (IDE) that you prefer to use for your programming projects. Popular choices include Visual Studio Code, IntelliJ IDEA, Sublime Text, Atom, etc.
Access Extension Marketplace:
Open your chosen text editor or IDE.
Navigate to the extension marketplace or plugin repository. This is usually accessible through the editor's menu or settings.
Search for Extensions:
Use the search functionality to find extensions or plugins that enhance the editor's capabilities. Common categories include:
Syntax highlighting and language support.
Code formatting and linting (code quality checking).
Version control system integration (Git, SVN, etc.).
Debugging tools and integrations.
Project management and task automation.
Install and Configure Extensions:
Click on the extension or plugin you want to install.
Follow the prompts to install it. The editor may require you to restart to complete the installation.
Configure the extension or plugin settings as per your preferences and project requirements.
Explore Recommended Extensions:

Check out editor-specific lists of recommended extensions or plugins often provided by the community or official documentation.
Review ratings, reviews, and download counts to gauge the popularity and reliability of extensions.
Stay Updated:
Regularly check for updates to installed extensions to benefit from bug fixes, new features, and compatibility improvements.
Customize Your Workflow:
Experiment with different combinations of extensions to tailor your development environment to suit your workflow and coding style.
9.	Document Your Setup: Create a comprehensive document outlining the steps you've taken to set up your developer environment. Include any configurations, customizations, or troubleshooting steps encountered during the process.
Introduction
Provide an overview of the purpose and scope of the document.
Mention the tools, languages, and frameworks covered in your setup.
System Requirements
List the minimum hardware and software requirements needed for your development environment.
Installation Steps
Operating System Setup:
Detail any specific OS configurations required (e.g., permissions, firewall settings).
Programming Languages and Runtimes:
Describe how to install and configure each programming language and runtime (e.g., Python, Node.js, Java).
Version Control System:
Outline the installation and setup of your version control system (e.g., Git), including any configurations for repositories.
Database Management System:
Explain the installation and configuration steps for your database system (e.g., MySQL), including initial setup of databases and users.
Development Tools and IDE:
Document the installation and setup of your chosen IDE or text editor, including recommended extensions or plugins.
Virtualization Tools (Optional):
If applicable, provide instructions for setting up Docker, virtual machines, or other virtualization solutions.
Configuration Details
Include specific configurations and customizations made to your development environment, such as:
Environment variables.
Editor settings (e.g., theme, key bindings).
Code linters, formatters, and other quality tools.
Troubleshooting
Document any common issues or errors encountered during setup and how they were resolved.
Provide troubleshooting steps or links to resources for further assistance.
Usage Instructions
Offer guidance on how to use the setup effectively, including:
Starting and stopping services (e.g., databases, Docker containers).
Running tests and debugging procedures.
Security Considerations
Include security best practices relevant to your setup, such as securing database access and managing credentials.
Maintenance and Updates
Describe how to update software components and maintain the integrity of your development environment over time.
References and Resources
List any external resources, documentation links, or tools referenced during the setup process.
Review and Update
Regularly review and update your setup documentation as your environment evolves or new tools are adopted.
